---
layout: training_philosophy
username: shiltemann
---

First off, I really like this idea of collecting different instructor's experiences, and love hearing about other people's styles, I am still trying to find what works best in which situations and this is great!

I have a similar philosophy, I like to start off with introductory slides, but not too long, I prefer the focus to be on the hands-on part. How exactly I do the hands-on part (whether I perform each step centrally and have students follow along, or if I have them work through the manual at their own pace and walk around for some 1-on-1 questions/discussions- depends heavily on the audience and topic. Some considerations:

- I often have groups of very mixed backgrounds, e.g. bioinformatics postdocs together with seasoned biology professors/PIs and medical clinicians (who aren't quite as computer savvy), together with university teachers looking to incorporate Galaxy into their curricula; and they typically go at vastly different paces. If I do things centrally, some will struggle to keep up and feel lost, and others may feel like things are going too slowly/be bored. In these cases I tend to prefer to let people go at their own pace, I think it is better if some people only make it halfway through the tutorial but at least understand that half well, rather than pulling them through too fast and leave them feeling like Galaxy is too complex for them. This also enables people to focus on/play around with the aspects that are interesting to them, some people want to understand every detail of the file formats, others just want to get a global picture of the topic and then explore unrelated aspects of Galaxy when they have time left over, or have a discussion with one of the instructors. Everybody gets something different from the workshop and that's ok!
- Doing everything centrally has downside that not everybody feels comfortable asking their questions in front of the class, but letting participants go at their own pace and answering questions one-on-one can be nicer for them (feasibility of this also depends on ratio of trainers-to-trainees, you want to be able to spend enough time chatting with everybody). This also gives opportunity for participants to ask questions that are specific to their research/situation etc.
- Working centrally does help pull people along if time is tight or if motivation is a concern (i.e. the researchers I teach are usually intrinsically motivated or they wouldn't be there in the first place, but teaching e.g. bachelor students who are only there because they have to be, was a very different experience ;))
- I usually end up doing something in the middle, most tutorials are naturally divided into substeps (e.g. QC/analysis/visualization/interpretation). After introductory slides, I introduce first hands-on subpart, ask them to work through manual themselves until they reach part X (say 30 minutes), walk around helping people when they get stuck or have questions, then do a quick recap centrally of what we did and why, ask them some questions to test their understanding, and then introduce the next section (often switching back to a few slides) and repeat.


Other random points:

- I like to walk around the room continually when not doing anything centrally, a lot of people are much more inclined to ask a question when you are standing right there next to them than when they have to get your attention from across the room.
- Repeat, repeat, repeat. You really can't explain things often enough, so mention things in the introductory slides, then repeat them during the hands-on session, then again during a wrap-up at end.
- I like to encourage people to work in pairs, it forces them to discuss things with each other, and on the practical side: if they bring their own laptops or are in a computer room that doesn't have dual monitors, having the manual open on one screen and Galaxy on the other is a nice way to work (split screen is not always very practical on small screens)
- I show up early to prepare the room, makes sure there is power for everybody, the wifi works etc, familiarize myself with the systems for presenting slides etc, chitchat with participants as they trickle in, make yourself approachable
- I like to prepare some organizational slides containing all other links the participants will need, the schedule, the materials, location of lunch etc, and make this into a tinyurl so that it is easy for participants to remember; one link to rule them all (for example https://tinyurl.com/GalaxyWorkshop from my last course, I just change content of slides for every new workshop)
- Before they leave, make sure participants have everything they need to keep learning; the tutorials and slides, but also ensure they know where to ask questions and engage with the community; biostars, gitter, github, mailing lists, events calendar etc.
- I keep a running list of issues we run into during the course, and can use this to improve the training materials later, or read through when preparing the next course, but I usually forget most of these points if I don't write them down as they occur.
- Have fun! If the workshop is enjoyable for you that will rub off on the students, so find the style that feels best for you! :)

EDIT: I just wanted to add that this is just a list of things I *try* to do and stick to, but in reality I often forget to do several of these things or things don't work out as intended/hoped or are complicated by circumstances of the day. And I am still continually revising this list and updating how I do things based on feedback from participants and tips I pick up from watching others teach etc
