---
layout: training_philosophy
username: moheydarian
---

I prefer to have workshop attendees interacting with Galaxy as much as possible during a workshop. I begin workshops with an overview of the agenda and some brief background on the Galaxy Project. I quickly move attendees over to the Galaxy instance and interactively walk through the Galaxy interface and have them register accounts.
From this point on, the workshop is hands-on and attendees are working through vetted exercises. Before executing an exercise, I like to go back to the slides to show some type of schematic representing the exercise and adding some biological context (i.e. showing overlapping intervals if working with ChIPseq peaks and promoters). I like using example data I am familiar with so that I can finish each exercise with some biological insight that was gained from the exercise.
I like to end workshops by introducing relevant sub-communities of Galaxy (GTN, Galaxy Biostars) and highlighting Galaxy events (GCC) that enable engagement with the Galaxy Community beyond the workshop.


Things to do before the workshop
- Set up a registration system (Google Forms works fine)
- Figure out the wifi, projector, seating capacity situation.
- Test compute resources, hands-on exercises in advance
- Pre-load sample data, if possible
- Email outreach@galaxyproject.org to have your workshop added to the Galaxy Events Calendar. Tweet about your workshop using the #useGalaxy hashtag


Things to do the day of the workshop
- Show up early
  - Test wifi and arrange tables/chairs so you can easily move around the room to assist workshop attendees
  - Write the web address to the Galaxy instance(s) on a board somewhere, include web address to slides if applicable
- Have workshop attendees complete a feedback form after workshop



Additional considerations
- Slow down and speak up - Speak slow and loud so everyone hears and understands what you are saying.
- Two is better than one - I prefer to have two people conducting a workshop. One person is guiding attendees through exercises, while the other is floating among the audience, helping anyone who has fallen behind.
- Leave no one behind - I have noticed that if a person falls behind the pace of the group, especially the presenter, even a little, they have a difficult time re-engaging. I try to prevent this by frequently verbally repeating exactly what I am clicking on while presenting the hands-on exercises.
