---
layout: training_philosophy
username: erasche
---

Love this idea! Y'all's posts were really helpful in the past days to give me some ideas and inspiration and maybe? a bit more confidence for holding my section of a workshop tuesday. It's been... a couple of years since I gave a training, so I feel *incredibly* unqualified to post next to y'all since y'all do this way more regularly.

But I gave a sysadmin-focused training yesterday and it was somewhat different to most of the stories here, so I'm writing this in case other admin trainers can find something useful.

**Some philosophy things**

- Like [@shiltemann](#shiltemann) I really prefer the at-your-own-pace. For really complex admin tasks + different skill levels, I find it a good fit. Everyone has their own gaps in knowledge due to specialisation, or their own issues due to their compute environment. Being able to help debug one-on-one with the particular problems of users is efficient for allowing everyone to continue making progress, no matter what their pace. Similarly people have different interests, sometimes you can spark them by linking to the "detailed capabilities" pages, so like the full list of things ansible can do out of the box, or everything terraform can manage. Maybe they can get inspiration from this list for how to apply the tool to their setup.
- Doing everything centrally can also work if everyone is on a standard environment. Here you can explain things in detail and have more opportunities for asking questions to the audience to check understanding which you miss out on in the one-on-ones
- Put everyone on the same, standardised environment. Provide some cloud VM with a web based file browser/editor/etc (e.g. Jupyterlab/Cloud9). If possible, provide a URL for the already running machines to the trainees; sometimes they forget to download the VM+setup virtualbox ahead of time.
- Before teaching any training module for the first time, run through it with a less experienced colleague. Administration topics often include large silent assumptions about prior knowledge. Running through the training with them will let you identify these issues and then you include any missing background knowledge in collapsible boxes or tips boxes.
- In a similar vein, be extremely specific in instructions. Where should each command be executed (maybe include terminal prompt, user@laptop vs user@cloud), exactly which URL people should be at for other tasks.
- Not everyone will be proactive in asking questions/putting their stickers up; it is good to walk around and talk to people often and ask how they're progress or finding things even if they seem to be doing ok. In my experience they'll often have issues that you can answer briefly or questions related to the use of the material in their own projects
- If possible, find common ground amongst participants (everyone needs to ... build reproducible environments, everyone needs to `___`) and from this, provide them with motivation for learning the tool you are teaching. In some trainings this is easier to do than others, and it depends on your audience and the topic.
- Have backup plans for your backup plans. If something out of your control goes wrong, at least knowing you have a plan can be reassuring as a trainer

**Things I wish someone had reminded me of before hand**

- To reiterate [@MoHeydarian](#moheydarian), especially if you're a native speaker, talk slowly,  clearly, loudly, and with as little slang/jargon as possible.
- From [@shiltemann](#shiltemann) to me: "don't be too hard on yourself. It's tough, nothing will go perfectly smoothly"

**Other**

- [@shiltemann](#shiltemann)'s tip about a tinyurl with all of the links was really useful, everyone could find the documentation without too much trouble!! Loved that.
