---
username: abretaud
layout: training_philosophy
---

My turn!

I mostly do training sessions for Conda and Galaxy tool dev, and some of the tutorials from GTN, mainly assembly and annotation until now.

The last time we did the Conda/tool dev one, some people wanted a tool dev training, some others wanted a Conda training. So we made it in 2 (small) days: 1 for conda, then 1 for tool dev. It worked great like this, people could come to Conda only or both Conda + tool dev.

For data analysis trainings, we usually focus on one topic, for half a day, or a full day.

For all these trainings, we have well-equiped training rooms with 1 PC for 1 or 2 people. Often people come with their own laptop. We leave them free to use it: if it's for data analysis, it should just work with a modern web browser (and it's good to work in their familiar environment). For dev, they just use a ready to use virtualbox image (we have it on usb stick if needed).

A few principles I try to adopt:

- Be simple: we try to keep it as informal as possible, with no registration fees, and invite (local) people to join just by sending us an email. I think it allows people to feel more free to come (they dont have to ask their boss for money). The little downside is of course that some of them can be less motivated, and can cancel at the last moment. But it's ok for us.
- Make it a fun moment: I love making bad jokes and silly puns (and I'm not ashamed). The good thing is that it makes the atmosphere more relaxed, and people are usually more prone to discussion when they're relaxed (they have no risk to be more ridiculous than I am). I feel that if a training session is very boring, people will disconnect after a moment, they will not come back to another session, and I will not be willing to do it another time as a trainer. So, have fun.
- Adapt to the audience: if a participant needs to focus on a specific question/kind of data/whatever, try to integrate it in the training. In our case, we usually propose a training after someone asks us to do it, so it's easy to discuss it beforehand and try to adapt to their need.
- Keep contact with people: I hate it when a trainer is just reciting the slides, not even looking at people. So I try to keep contact with attendees, asking questions, trying to detect when someone gets lost, reexplaining when I see that something is not clear.
- Be honest: don't try to hide when you don't know an answer or if there's an unexpected result. It's a good opportunity to look for the answer or understand what's going on together.
- Don't be alone: I prefer to be at least 2 trainers. It allows to answer questions more quickly, and to reexplain things differently if needed. (and it is more fun too)


We also do a full week of bioinformatics training for biology students (I don't participate to all the sessions though). Most of them have never manipulated a fastq file, but they have a good biology background.
Each day we begin with slides to introduce the topic (2~3 hours), and the rest of the day they run the hands-on.
The first day is an introduction: why computing matters in biology? what is a computing cluster? what is Galaxy? Then they run the Galaxy 101/peaks2genes tutorials.
Second day is for genome assembly and annotation, third day is RNASeq analysis, and then they have some snp calling and metagenomic.
The program might look scary, but we don't try to make them experts of each kind analysis, we just try to give them a concetre overview of what it looks like to do real data analysis.

For the hand-on we (2 trainers) usually give them access to the tutorial, give them a brief overview of the goal, and then just let them work. We keep on circulating, checking that no one is blocked, answering questions. When we get 2 or 3 times the same question, or if we see they have difficulties, we stop everyone and clarify the problem.

- I'm always amazed how quickly they understand how to use Galaxy
- Tutorials are well suited to this audience, they just follow it and that's it
- The downside is that if you don't discuss with the students, they can just follow the tutorial, get their result, even if they have not understood anything. As they're shy and forced to be here, they won't necessarily ask for help...
- As they're shy and forced to be here, we get few questions during the slides too.
- To fight this, and as we are evils, we hide some answers to the questions in the tutorial (we give them a pdf), and we ask them to write them in a report. We also add a few questions on the slides too, to make sure they listen. We don't really care if they cheat, and we help them if they're blocked. It's just a way to force them to think about what they do. Not completely satisfied with this system, maybe we'll change it next year...

That's it for me.
