 
> This is a tutorial on SARS-CoV-2 sequence analysis using Galaxy and ARTIC protocol illumina sequencing data. Severre acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the aetiological agent of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). SARS-CoV-2 has a linear RNA genome of ~ 30,000 bases with 11 coding genes which codes for 12 proteins including spike proteins. Sequencing of these genes can used to identify genetic mutations in the SARS-CoV-2 genome. Detection of mutations among the circulating SARS-CoV-2 strains is important to infer the  lineages within which these strains fall in thus important in tracing the emergency of new strains both at national and local level. Here are some  definition;
> **Epidemiology**: Is the study of distribution and determinants of health-related outcomes in a particular population and application of of this study to control health problems. 
> **Genomic epidemiology**: Is the  use of pathogen genomic data to determine the distribution and spread of an infectious diseases in a specified population and application of this information in the control of health problems. In the context of SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, the virus genome can be sequenced and this data used to monitor the emergence of important new variants, monitor the trends after an intervention. 

This tutorial is meant to assist you in analyzing  SARS-CoV-2  short read sequence data with aims of identifying the SARS-CoV-2 variants, assign lineages and help monitor the circulating SARS-CoV-2 strains. This is important in public health managemet of SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. No background knowledge of computing and bioinformatics is needed throughout this tutorial.