---
layout: training_experience

title: de.NBI Cloud User Meeting
contributors:
  - erasche
---

## At-your-own-pace

**Philosophy**: Everyone works at their own pace, giving you time to help debug individual issues.

**Reality**: This worked OK. Not amazing, just OK. This is partially a problem of "no standard environment", and if everyone started from the same place we could also do it together. Everyone had some different bug, their environment was wrong, or didn't have python, or they used a mac, or some other situation we couldn't prepare for. If we would have had everyone in lockstep, I think we would have spent a lot of time debugging a couple of people at the expense over everyone else. Being able to help 1:1 debug the particular problems of users was a useful feature of this style.

## Standard Environments

**Philosophy**: Put everyone on the same, standard environment to decrease friction and increase the reproducibility of the training materials.

**Reality**: My group were wildly different in their environments, and usually not completely equipped to debug  issues they encountered in their environment. Likewise, the training materials usually do not plan for this. Bjoern later lead a training where everyone was given VMs with everything they need to do the training and this went much more smoothly! If I had known this was available I would have requested it, it would have saved time.

On the other hand for admin tools like this, maybe it's useful that people install on their local machine? Especially if they plan to use it or play with it later? Not some ephemeral VM? Maybe should say standard environment "unless you know what you're doing and want to do it differently". I think there is no good answer other than just dictating what to do, but that's hard to do when some people bring windows boxes.

Additionally, the cloud that was available was extremely different from the cloud that I've tested it against. In the Freiburg cloud we have (essentially) unlimited public IPs, while in the training location their cloud required significant hurdles to configuring the networking for VMs.

## Run through training with less experienced colleague

**Philosophy**: Before teaching any training module for the first time, run through it with a less experienced colleague.

**Reality**: I did this, but said colleague is comfortable with administration topics and linux already which did not match the experience of the trainees. We tested on a normal ubuntu box.

## Specific Instructions

**Philosophy**: Be extremely specific in instructions. Where should each command be executed (maybe include terminal prompt, user@laptop vs user@cloud), exactly which URL people should be at for other tasks.

**Reality**: Some users ran the tutorial locally, some inside VMs on their laptops, some on the ubuntu VM in the cloud. This was a colossal mess.

I made the assumption that they would run it on their own machine because it's ansible, we all do that. Large oversight there. This caused a lot of downstream issues too:

- Ubuntu VMs didn't have python. Those that did run it from their laptop found ansible not working because of missing python
- Users that ran remotely needed to generate an SSH key + add it for localhost.
- Fortunately I did document the "what if different ssh user"
- Need to document "what if different ssh key" and the other options for that field.

## Motivation

**Philosophy**: If possible, find common ground amongst participants (everyone needs to ... build reproducible environments, everyone needs to do X) and from this, provide them with motivation for learning the tool you are teaching

**Reality**: Only some of my users were intrinsically motivated. I provided the real life use cases where the training I was giving saved us from massive pain and crying. But this is not sufficient to motivate everyone. The only thing that **really** motivates people to learn ansible+terraform is to have things go really, really wrong. So this makes it tough since not everyone sees it as useful, and it's more like teaching bachelor students again.

## Recap

**Philosophy**: end each segment, training, day with a recap.

**Reality**: forgot them all. Thankfully Bjoern stepped in to do the end-of-day recap.

## Random

- Still talk way too fast, since I'm a native speaker / always nervous
- The advice provided in training philosophies was extremely useful but unfortunately many tips (show them how to do it with Lego) have no easy translation to admin topics.
